---
title: >-
  CleanX: A Python library for data cleaning of large sets of
  radiology images
tags:
  - Python
  - radiology
  - imaging
  - medical imaging
authors:
  - name: Candace Makeda Moore
    orcid: 0000-0003-1672-7565
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Andrew Murphy
    orcid: 0000-0002-7710-6095
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Oleg Sivokon
    affiliation: 3
  - name: Patrice J Musoke
    orcid: 0000-0002-8379-5130
    affiliation: 4
affiliations:
 - name: Netherlands eScience Center, Amsterdam, Netherlands
   index: 1
 - name: >-
     Department of Medical Imaging, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
     Brisbane, QLD, Australia
   index: 2
 - name: Bright Computing / NVIDIA, Netherlands
   index: 3
 - name: Temple University
   index: 4
date: 25 January 2022
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary


Radiological images of various anatomy are part of the diagnostic
work-up for millions of patients for diverse indications.  A
considerable amount of time and resources have gone into the effort to
develop automated diagnostic interpretation of these images. The
purpose of this library is to help scientists, medical professionals,
and programmers create better datasets upon which algorithms related
to X-rays, MRIs or CTs can be based.

CleanX is a Python package for data cleaning that was developed for
radiology artificial intelligence (AI).


# Statement of need

`CleanX` is a Python package for data exploration, cleaning, and
augmentation that was originally developed for radiology AI. Python is
a widely used language on a global level. Data preparation for
building quality machine learning algorithms is known to be a
time-consuming task [@10.1145/2207243.2207253]. Of the tasks involved,
'data cleaning' alone usually takes the majority of time spent on
analysis for clinical research projects [@tidy-data]. The task of data
cleaning is a necessary step even in the case of relatively
high-quality data to avoid the known problem of "garbage in, garbage
out" [@Rahm2000DataCP].

In contemporary research, many approaches to data cleaning for
radiology datasets overlook the content of the images themselves. The
quality of data, especially the image data, is often context-specific
to a specific AI model.

Algorithms that rely on shape detection may be accomplished with
contrast and positional invariance, but many neural networks or
radiomics algorithms can and should not be insensitive contrast or
position. Thus scales like MIDaR [@Harvey2019] are necessary but not
sufficient to describe data. Despite the specific nature of quality
issues for each model, some potential data contamination problems
should be cleaned out of imaging datasets for most algorithms.

In the case of radiological datasets, the task of data cleaning
involves checking the accuracy of labelling and/or the quality of the
images themselves. Potential problems inside the images themselves in
large datasets include the inclusion of "out of domain data" and
"label leakage". Some types of "out of domain data" may not be
apparent to non-radiologists and have been a particular problem in
datasets web-scraped together by non-radiologists [@Tizhoosh2021].

"Label leakage" depends on the desired labels for a dataset but can
happen in many ways. More subtle forms of label leakage may occur when
certain machines are more likely to be used on certain
patients. Depending upon the goals of a model, there may be other
types of "out of domain data" that are easy to see, such as inverted
or flipped images. Even this can cost tremendous amounts of time to
remove from a dataset with hundreds of thousands of images.

While data cleaning can not be fully automated at present, it is
unrealistic for many data science practitioners and researchers to
afford the hours of an imaging specialist for every data cleaning
task. This package speeds up data cleaning, and gives researchers some
basic insights into datasets of images. It also has functions for
augmenting X-ray images so that the resultant images are within domain
data.

Automated data cleaning can improve dataset quality on some
parameters. This work includes open code originally built to help with
automatic chest X-ray dataset exploratory data analysis and data
cleaning. It was expanded to include functions for DICOM processing,
and image data normalization and augmentations. Some of the functions
can be used to clean up a dataset of any two dimensional
images. Several algorithms for identifying out of domain data in a
large dataset of chest-X rays facilitated by the functions in this
code library.


# Acknowledgements

We acknowledge many contributions from Eliane Birba (delwende) and
Oleg Sivokon (wvxvw) during the testing and documentation of the code
related to this project. We did not receive any financial support for
this project.

# References
